docs/streaming_pipeline_and_emitters.md, before:

# Streaming Pipeline & Emitters

This document describes how the pipe converts OpenRouter Responses **SSE** (Server-Sent Events) into the incremental UI updates Open WebUI expects: text deltas, status updates, citations, notifications, and a final completion frame.

> **Quick navigation:** [Docs Home](README.md) · [Valves](valves_and_configuration_atlas.md) · [Concurrency](concurrency_controls_and_resilience.md) · [Errors](error_handling_and_user_experience.md)

---

## 1. High-level architecture

The streaming path is implemented by `send_openai_responses_streaming_request()` and the streaming loop that consumes it.

Conceptually:

```text
OpenRouter SSE (aiohttp) → chunk queue → JSON parse workers → ordered event drain → emitters → Open WebUI client
```

Key design goals:
- Preserve event ordering, even with multiple parser workers.
- Avoid unbounded memory growth under load (tunable queue sizes).
- Degrade predictably under backpressure rather than silently dropping events.

---

## 2. SSE ingestion and ordering

### Producer (SSE reader)
The producer reads the OpenRouter `text/event-stream` response and:
- extracts `data:` lines into full SSE “data blobs”
- assigns an incrementing sequence number (`seq`)
- enqueues `(seq, data_blob)` into the **chunk queue**

### Workers (JSON parsers)
The pipe spawns `SSE_WORKERS_PER_REQUEST` worker tasks. Each worker:
- dequeues `(seq, data_blob)` from the chunk queue
- parses JSON
- enqueues `(seq, event_dict)` into the **event queue**

### Drain (ordered emission)
The drain loop:
- stores out-of-order events in a `pending_events` map
- emits events strictly in ascending `seq` order
- raises a structured error if it detects a streaming error event

---

## 3. Queue sizing, backpressure, and deadlocks

The streaming pipeline uses two queues with valve controls:

- `STREAMING_CHUNK_QUEUE_MAXSIZE`: raw SSE JSON blobs (pre-parse)
- `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_MAXSIZE`: parsed JSON events (post-parse)

Defaults are `0` (unbounded) for both queues.

**Warning:** Very small bounded sizes can create deadlock-style stalls in tool-heavy or persistence-heavy workloads (slow drain → event queue fills → workers block → chunk queue fills → producer blocks). The valve descriptions explicitly warn that bounded values under a few hundred can hang under load.

Monitoring:
- `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_WARN_SIZE` emits a backend warning (rate-limited) when the event queue backlog is high.

---

## 4. What Open WebUI receives (emitters and event types)

The pipe emits Open WebUI-compatible events via the provided `event_emitter` callable.

Common event types:

| Event type | Purpose |
| --- | --- |
| `chat:message` | Updates the visible assistant message content (streaming text snapshots). |
| `chat:completion` | Final frame that ends the request; may include `usage` and must include `content` (even when empty). |
| `status` | Progress and warning messages displayed as status updates. |
| `citation` | Normalized citation payloads (documents/metadata/source). |
| `notification` | Toast-style notifications (info/success/warning/error). |

Notes:
- The streaming loop may emit intermediate `chat:message` frames as content changes, and ends with a `chat:completion` frame.
- When `SHOW_FINAL_USAGE_STATUS=True`, the pipe formats a final status description using usage/cost/tokens when present.

---

## 5. Streaming errors and how they surface

OpenRouter can report failures mid-stream. The pipe detects streaming error payloads (for example `response.failed` or events carrying an `error` block) and converts them into an `OpenRouterAPIError`.

That error is then handled by the same OpenRouter template system described in:
- [Error Handling & User Experience](error_handling_and_user_experience.md)

This keeps user-facing failures consistent between streaming and non-streaming calls.

---

## 6. Server-side delta batching (capability vs current configuration)

The SSE pipeline supports server-side batching of `response.output_text.delta` events (accumulating deltas and yielding combined batches) using the `delta_char_limit` and `idle_flush_ms` parameters.

In current code paths, the pipe calls the streaming request helper with:
- `delta_char_limit=0`
- `idle_flush_ms=0`

This configuration effectively passes through deltas without batching.

---

## 7. Tuning checklist

- Increase throughput (at cost of per-request CPU): raise `SSE_WORKERS_PER_REQUEST` (up to the code-enforced cap).
- Avoid stalls under tool-heavy loads: keep `STREAMING_CHUNK_QUEUE_MAXSIZE=0` and `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_MAXSIZE=0` unless you have a measured reason to bound them.
- Improve observability: set `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_WARN_SIZE` low enough to signal stress early, but high enough to avoid constant warnings.

All related defaults and ranges are listed in [Valves & Configuration Atlas](valves_and_configuration_atlas.md).

Commit message:

fix: bound middleware stream queue

docs/streaming_pipeline_and_emitters.md, after:

# Streaming Pipeline & Emitters

This document describes how the pipe converts OpenRouter Responses **SSE** (Server-Sent Events) into the incremental UI updates Open WebUI expects: text deltas, status updates, citations, notifications, and a final completion frame.

> **Quick navigation:** [Docs Home](README.md) · [Valves](valves_and_configuration_atlas.md) · [Concurrency](concurrency_controls_and_resilience.md) · [Errors](error_handling_and_user_experience.md)

---

## 1. High-level architecture

The streaming path is implemented by `send_openai_responses_streaming_request()` and the streaming loop that consumes it.

Conceptually:

```text
OpenRouter SSE (aiohttp) → chunk queue → JSON parse workers → ordered event drain → emitters → Open WebUI client
```

Key design goals:
- Preserve event ordering, even with multiple parser workers.
- Avoid unbounded memory growth under load (tunable queue sizes).
- Degrade predictably under backpressure rather than silently dropping events.

---

## 2. SSE ingestion and ordering

### Producer (SSE reader)
The producer reads the OpenRouter `text/event-stream` response and:
- extracts `data:` lines into full SSE “data blobs”
- assigns an incrementing sequence number (`seq`)
- enqueues `(seq, data_blob)` into the **chunk queue**

### Workers (JSON parsers)
The pipe spawns `SSE_WORKERS_PER_REQUEST` worker tasks. Each worker:
- dequeues `(seq, data_blob)` from the chunk queue
- parses JSON
- enqueues `(seq, event_dict)` into the **event queue**

### Drain (ordered emission)
The drain loop:
- stores out-of-order events in a `pending_events` map
- emits events strictly in ascending `seq` order
- raises a structured error if it detects a streaming error event

---

## 3. Queue sizing, backpressure, and deadlocks

The streaming pipeline uses two queues with valve controls:

- `STREAMING_CHUNK_QUEUE_MAXSIZE`: raw SSE JSON blobs (pre-parse)
- `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_MAXSIZE`: parsed JSON events (post-parse)

Defaults are `0` (unbounded) for both queues.

**Warning:** Very small bounded sizes can create deadlock-style stalls in tool-heavy or persistence-heavy workloads (slow drain → event queue fills → workers block → chunk queue fills → producer blocks). The valve descriptions explicitly warn that bounded values under a few hundred can hang under load.

Monitoring:
- `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_WARN_SIZE` emits a backend warning (rate-limited) when the event queue backlog is high.

### Middleware streaming bridge queue (Open WebUI generator)

When `pipe(..., body={"stream": true})` is used, the pipe returns an async generator that yields Open WebUI-compatible chunks. Internally, request-scoped tasks enqueue items into a per-request queue that the generator drains.

This bridge is controlled by:
- `MIDDLEWARE_STREAM_QUEUE_MAXSIZE` (default `0` = unbounded)
- `MIDDLEWARE_STREAM_QUEUE_PUT_TIMEOUT_SECONDS` (only applies when maxsize > 0)

Rationale: a stalled or slow client should not allow unbounded memory growth, and teardown should not hang while attempting to enqueue the final sentinel.

---

## 4. What Open WebUI receives (emitters and event types)

The pipe emits Open WebUI-compatible events via the provided `event_emitter` callable.

Common event types:

| Event type | Purpose |
| --- | --- |
| `chat:message` | Updates the visible assistant message content (streaming text snapshots). |
| `chat:completion` | Final frame that ends the request; may include `usage` and must include `content` (even when empty). |
| `status` | Progress and warning messages displayed as status updates. |
| `citation` | Normalized citation payloads (documents/metadata/source). |
| `notification` | Toast-style notifications (info/success/warning/error). |

Notes:
- The streaming loop may emit intermediate `chat:message` frames as content changes, and ends with a `chat:completion` frame.
- When `SHOW_FINAL_USAGE_STATUS=True`, the pipe formats a final status description using usage/cost/tokens when present.

---

## 5. Streaming errors and how they surface

OpenRouter can report failures mid-stream. The pipe detects streaming error payloads (for example `response.failed` or events carrying an `error` block) and converts them into an `OpenRouterAPIError`.

That error is then handled by the same OpenRouter template system described in:
- [Error Handling & User Experience](error_handling_and_user_experience.md)

This keeps user-facing failures consistent between streaming and non-streaming calls.

---

## 6. Server-side delta batching (capability vs current configuration)

The SSE pipeline supports server-side batching of `response.output_text.delta` events (accumulating deltas and yielding combined batches) using the `delta_char_limit` and `idle_flush_ms` parameters.

In current code paths, the pipe calls the streaming request helper with:
- `delta_char_limit=0`
- `idle_flush_ms=0`

This configuration effectively passes through deltas without batching.

---

## 7. Tuning checklist

- Increase throughput (at cost of per-request CPU): raise `SSE_WORKERS_PER_REQUEST` (up to the code-enforced cap).
- Avoid stalls under tool-heavy loads: keep `STREAMING_CHUNK_QUEUE_MAXSIZE=0` and `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_MAXSIZE=0` unless you have a measured reason to bound them.
- Improve observability: set `STREAMING_EVENT_QUEUE_WARN_SIZE` low enough to signal stress early, but high enough to avoid constant warnings.

All related defaults and ranges are listed in [Valves & Configuration Atlas](valves_and_configuration_atlas.md).
